standard lazy types (#2788)
rust-lang/rfcs: text/0000-standard-lazy-types.md

- Feature Name: `once_cell`
- Start Date: 2019-10-17
- RFC PR: [rust-lang/rfcs#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/0000)
- Rust Issue: [rust-lang/rust#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/0000)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Add support for lazy initialized values to standard library, effectively superseding the popular [`lazy_static`] crate.

```rust
use std::sync::Lazy;

// `BACKTRACE` implements `Deref<Target = Option<String>>` and is initialized
// on the first access
static BACKTRACE: Lazy<Option<String>> = Lazy::new(|| {
    std::env::var("RUST_BACKTRACE").ok()
});
```

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

> Working with lazy initialized values is ubiquitous, [`lazy_static`] and [`lazycell`] crates have more than 20 million downloads combined.

Author: The motivation is that lazy values are ubiquitous, and I doubt there's any disagreement there. Download count is the consequence of ubiquity.

> Working with lazy initialized values is ubiquitous, [`lazy_static`] and [`lazycell`] crates have more than 20 million downloads combined.

Reviewer: Here you are using download count as evidence of ubiquity tho, and I think it's a poor measurement for that.

> Working with lazy initialized values is ubiquitous, [`lazy_static`] and [`lazycell`] crates have more than 20 million downloads combined.

Reviewer 2: As it so happens reverse dependencies is one of the numbers you can find in my [Top 500 Crates](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1wwahRMHG3buvnfHjmPQFU4Kyfq15oTwbfsuZpwHUKc4/edit#gid=1253069234) survey spreadsheet. `lazy_static` ranks at #7 among the top 500 deps for "most reverse dependencies", at ~2400:

<img width="256" alt="Screen Shot 2019-10-18 at 2 04 01 PM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/797/67128416-6efb1e80-f1b0-11e9-80e0-5f23f5807c46.png">

> Working with lazy initialized values is ubiquitous, [`lazy_static`] and [`lazycell`] crates have more than 20 million downloads combined.

Reviewer: Yes, but use that measurement in the RFC instead. My point is not that lazy_static isn't widely used, it is, but that download counts are not an indicator.

> Working with lazy initialized values is ubiquitous, [`lazy_static`] and [`lazycell`] crates have more than 20 million downloads combined.

Reviewer 3: Looking at the statistics from crates.io, `lazy_static` has by far the most reverse dependencies of the crates that inspire this RFC. Combined with `lazy_cell` and `once_cell` they have about 2475 reverse dependencies, 8% of all crates.

> Working with lazy initialized values is ubiquitous, [`lazy_static`] and [`lazycell`] crates have more than 20 million downloads combined.

Author: My point is that, **for lazy_static** case, numbers are irrelevant: it's obvious that everyone uses it. I've removed them altogether.

> Working with lazy initialized values is ubiquitous, [`lazy_static`] and [`lazycell`] crates have more than 20 million downloads combined.

Reviewer: Thanks!

        let cfg = self.config.get_or_try_init(|| {
            fs::read_to_string(&self.config_path)
        })?;
        Ok(cfg.as_str())
    }
}
```

We also provide a more convenient but less powerful `Lazy<T, F>` wrapper around `OnceCell<T>`, which allows to specify the initializing closure at creation time:

```rust
pub struct Lazy<T, F = fn() -> T> { ... }

impl<T, F> Lazy<T, F> {
    /// Creates a new lazy value with the given initializing function.
    pub const fn new(init: F) -> Lazy<T, F>;
}

impl<T, F: FnOnce() -> T> Lazy<T, F> {
    /// Forces the evaluation of this lazy value and returns a reference to
    /// the result.
    ///
    /// This is equivalent to the `Deref` impl, but is explicit.
    pub fn force(this: &Lazy<T, F>) -> &T;
}

impl<T, F: FnOnce() -> T> Deref for Lazy<T, F> {
    type Target = T;

    fn deref(&self) -> &T;
}
```

`Lazy` directly replaces `lazy_static!`:

```rust
use std::{sync::{Mutex, Lazy}, collections::HashMap};

static GLOBAL_DATA: Lazy<Mutex<HashMap<i32, String>>> = Lazy::new(|| {
    let mut m = HashMap::new();
    m.insert(13, "Spica".to_string());
    m.insert(74, "Hoyten".to_string());
    Mutex::new(m)
});
```

> Moreover, once `#[thread_local]` attribute is stable, `Lazy` will supplant `std::thread_local!` as well:

Reviewer 4: `thread_local!` actually does a lot more than `lazy_static!` since it needs to set up destructors to run when the thread exits. It also needs to ensure the thread-local data isn't accessed after it has been dropped.

> Moreover, once `#[thread_local]` attribute is stable, `Lazy` will supplant `std::thread_local!` as well:

Author: Hm, indeed, I for some reason assumed that destructor management was handled by the compiler, but [this is done by the library](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/b7a9c285a50f3a94c44687ba9ff3ab0648243aaa/src/libstd/thread/local.rs#L428-L470).

However, it provides significantly nicer ergonomics for the common use-case of static lazy values.

Non thread-safe flavor is implemented by storing an `UnsafeCell<Option<T>>`:

```rust
pub struct OnceCell<T> {
    // Invariant: written to at most once.
    inner: UnsafeCell<Option<T>>,
}
```

The implementation is mostly straightforward.
The only tricky bit is that reentrant initialization should be explicitly forbidden.
That is, the following program panics:

```rust
let x: OnceCell<Box<i32>> = OnceCell::new();
let dangling_ref: Cell<Option<&i32>> = Cell::new(None);
x.get_or_init(|| {
    let r = x.get_or_init(|| Box::new(92));
    dangling_ref.set(Some(r));
    Box::new(62)
});
println!("would be use after free: {:?}", dangling_ref.get().unwrap());
```

Non thread-safe flavor can be added to `core` as well.

The thread-safe variant is implemented similarly to `std::sync::Once`.
Crucially, it has support for blocking: if many threads call `get_or_init` concurrently, only one will be able to execute the closure, while all other threads will block.
For this reason, `std::sync::OnceCell` can not be provided in core.

> Even the minimal `OnceCell::<T>::set` API requires support for blocking, because one can't atomically set arbitrary `T`.

Reviewer 5: Does "implemented similarly to" mean that the relevant logic has to be duplicated? This feels like an opportunity for code sharing to me.

Reviewer 6: Yes in fact the `once_cell` implementation uses `std::sync::Once` under the hood.

Reviewer 3: As far as I understand it:

`once_cell` contains a very readable implementation with a mutex from `parking_lot`.

In the case without `parking_lot` it can't use a mutex because the standard library does not have a const `Mutex::new`. It also can't use `std::sync::Once`, because that doesn't support initialization functions that can fail. So it does a tricky dance with atomics and thread parking similar to `std::sync::Once`.

It seems to me using a mutex is the better solution, but not possible as long as the standard library relies on system provides mutexes. Maybe it is best if the RFC describes these are two possible options, but does not specify which implementation to use?

Reviewer 7: If / when https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/56410 works out, the standard library’s `Mutex::new` can probably be a `const fn`.

                ???
            })
        }
    }
}
```

Or for singletons, initialized with parameters:

```rust
use std::{env, io, sync::OnceCell};

#[derive(Debug)]
pub struct Logger { ... }

static INSTANCE: OnceCell<Logger> = OnceCell::new();
impl Logger {
    pub fn global() -> &'static Logger {
        INSTANCE.get().expect("logger is not initialized")
    }
    fn from_cli(args: env::Args) -> Result<Logger, std::io::Error> { ... }
}

fn main() {
    let logger = Logger::from_cli(env::args()).unwrap();

    // Note how we use locally-created value for initialization.
    INSTANCE.set(logger).unwrap();

    // use `Logger::global()` from now on
}
```

## Why `OnceCell` as a primitive?

It is possible to imagine a type, slightly more general than `OnceCell`:

```rust
struct OnceFlipCell<U, V> { ... }

impl<U, V> OnceFlipCell<U, V> {
    const fn new(initial_value: U) -> OnceFlipCell<U, V>;

    fn get_or_init<F: FnOnce(U) -> V>(&self, f: F) -> &V;
}

type OnceCell<T> = OnceFlipCell<(), T>;
```

That is, we can store some initial state in the cell and consume it during initialization.
In practice, such flexibility seems to be rarely required.

> Even if we add a type, similar to `OnceFlipCell`, having a dedicated `OnceCell` (which *could* be implemented on top of `OnceFlipCell`) type simplifies common use-case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even if we add a type, similar to `OnceFlipCell`, having a dedicated `OnceCell` (which *could* be implemented on top of `OnceFlipCell`) type simplifies a common use-case.
```

impl<T: UnwindSafe + RefUnwindSafe> RefUnwindSafe for OnceCell<T> {}
```

## Default type parameter on `Lazy`

`Lazy` is defined with default type parameter.

```rust
pub struct Lazy<T, F = fn() -> T> { ... }
```

This is important to make using `Lazy` in static contexts convenient.
Without this default, the user would have to type `T` type twice:

```rust
static GLOBAL_DATA: Lazy<Mutex<HashMap<i32, String>>, fn() -> Mutex<HashMap<i32, String>>
    = Lazy::new(|| ... );
```

If we allow type inference in statics, this could be shortened to

```rust
static GLOBAL_DATA: Lazy<Mutex<HashMap<i32, String>>, _>
    = Lazy::new(|| ... );
```

There are two drawbacks of using fn pointer type:

* fn pointers are not ZSTs, so we waste one pointer per static lazy value.
  Lazy locals will generally rely on type-inference and will use more specific closure type.
* Specifying type for local lazy value might be tricky: `let x: Lazy<i32> = Lazy::new(|| closed_over_var)` fails with type error, the correct syntax is `let x: Lazy<i32, _> = Lazy::new(|| closed_over_var)`.

## Only thread-safe flavor

It is possible to add only `sync` version of the types, as they are the most useful.

> However, this will be against zero cost abstractions spirit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, this would be against zero cost abstractions spirit.
```

Additionally, non thread-safe version is required to replace `thread_local!` macro without imposing synchronization.

# Prior art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

The primary bit of prior art here is the [`once_cell`] library, which itself draws on multiple sources:

* [double-checked-cell](https://crates.io/crates/double-checked-cell)
* [lazy-init](https://crates.io/crates/lazy-init)
* [lazycell](https://crates.io/crates/lazycell)

> * [mitochondria](https://crates.io/crates/mitochondria)

Reviewer: So it seems worth discussing why this design and not the ones in the other crates?

Author: All significant design alternatives I am aware of are discussed in the RFC. As far as I know, each of this crates provides a subset of once_cell \cup alternatives API, as far as lazy values are concerned.

* [lazy_static](https://crates.io/crates/lazy_static)

Many languages provide library-defined lazy values, for example [Kotlin](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin/lazy.html#kotlin$lazy(kotlin.Function0((kotlin.lazy.T)))).
Typically, a lazy value is just a wrapper around closure.
This design doesn't always work in Rust, as closing over `self` runs afoul of the borrow checker, we need a more primitive `OnceCell` type.

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

- What is the best naming/place for these types?
- What is the best naming scheme for methods? Is it `get_or_try_init` or `try_inert_with`?
- Is the `F = fn() -> T` hack worth it?

# Future possibilities
[future-possibilities]: #future-possibilities

* Once `#[thread_local]` attribute is stable, `cell::Lazy` can serve as a replacement for `std::thread_local!` macro.

> * Supporting type inference in constants might allow us to drop the default type parameter on `Lazy`.

Reviewer: `impl Trait` would be enough?

Author: Nope, spelling `impl Fn() -> T` is not better than spelling `fn() -> T`. The problem is not that fn-pointer is inneficient, the problem is that the syntax to write it is verbose.

Here's how `OnceCell` can be used to implement lazy-initialized global data:

```rust
use std::{sync::{Mutex, OnceCell}, collections::HashMap};

fn global_data() -> &'static Mutex<HashMap<i32, String>> {
    static INSTANCE: OnceCell<Mutex<HashMap<i32, String>>> = OnceCell::new();
    INSTANCE.get_or_init(|| {
        let mut m = HashMap::new();
        m.insert(13, "Spica".to_string());
        m.insert(74, "Hoyten".to_string());
        Mutex::new(m)
    })
}
```

Here's how `OnceCell` can be used to implement a lazy field:

```rust
use std::{fs, io, path::PathBuf, cell::OnceCell};

struct Ctx {
    config_path: PathBuf,
    config: OnceCell<String>,
}

impl Ctx {
    pub fn get_config(&self) -> Result<&str, io::Error> {
        let cfg = self.config.get_or_try_init(|| {
            fs::read_to_string(&self.config_path)
        })?;
        Ok(cfg.as_str())
    }
}
```

We also provide a more convenient but less powerful `Lazy<T, F>` wrapper around `OnceCell<T>`, which allows to specify the initializing closure at creation time:

```rust
pub struct Lazy<T, F = fn() -> T> { ... }

impl<T, F> Lazy<T, F> {
    /// Creates a new lazy value with the given initializing function.

>     pub const fn new(init: F) -> Lazy<T, F>;

Author: I guess we can. Not sure how useful it would be. In particular, we can't spell `const impl From` yet. As adding `From` is backwards compatible, I suggest omitting this from the initial implementation.

}

impl<T, F: FnOnce() -> T> Lazy<T, F> {
    /// Forces the evaluation of this lazy value and returns a reference to
    /// the result.
    ///
    /// This is equivalent to the `Deref` impl, but is explicit.
    pub fn force(this: &Lazy<T, F>) -> &T;
}

impl<T, F: FnOnce() -> T> Deref for Lazy<T, F> {
    type Target = T;

>     fn deref(&self) -> &T;

Reviewer 8: Why do you choose `deref` function for calculating the result? I mean, the init function might be time consuming, and in general we don't expect a `deref` operation to be slow. Why not adding an inherent method for this?

}
```

The implementation is mostly straightforward.
The only tricky bit is that reentrant initialization should be explicitly forbidden.
That is, the following program panics:

```rust
let x: OnceCell<Box<i32>> = OnceCell::new();
let dangling_ref: Cell<Option<&i32>> = Cell::new(None);
x.get_or_init(|| {
    let r = x.get_or_init(|| Box::new(92));
    dangling_ref.set(Some(r));
    Box::new(62)
});
println!("would be use after free: {:?}", dangling_ref.get().unwrap());
```

Non thread-safe flavor can be added to `core` as well.

The thread-safe variant is implemented similarly to `std::sync::Once`.
Crucially, it has support for blocking: if many threads call `get_or_init` concurrently, only one will be able to execute the closure, while all other threads will block.
For this reason, most of `std::sync::OnceCell` API can not be provided in `core`.
In the `sync` case, reliably panicking on re-entrant initialization is not trivial.
For this reason, the implementaion would simply deadlock, with a note that a deadlock might be elevated to panic in the future.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

* This is a moderately large addition to stdlib, there's a chance we do something wrong.

>   This can be mitigated by piece-wise stabilization (in particular, `Lazy` convenience types are optional) and the fact that API is battle-tested via `once_cell` crate.

Reviewer 9: nit: maybe prefer "widely used", "heavily audited", or some other more concrete and less aggressive description than "battle-tested"?

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

Lazy values are a form of interior mutability.
The key observation is that restricting a cell to single assignment allows to safely return a shared reference to the contents of the cell.
Such cell is called `OnceCell`, by analogy with `std::sync::Once` type. The core API is as follows:

```rust
pub struct OnceCell<T> { ... }

impl<T> OnceCell<T> {
    /// Creates a new empty cell.
    pub const fn new() -> OnceCell<T>;

    /// Gets the reference to the underlying value.
    ///
    /// Returns `None` if the cell is empty.
    pub fn get(&self) -> Option<&T>;

    /// Sets the contents of this cell to `value`.
    ///
    /// Returns `Ok(())` if the cell was empty and `Err(value)` if it was
    /// full.
    pub fn set(&self, value: T) -> Result<(), T>;

    /// Gets the contents of the cell, initializing it with `f`
    /// if the cell was empty.
    ///
    /// # Panics
    ///
    /// If `f` panics, the panic is propagated to the caller, and the cell
    /// remains uninitialized.
    ///
    /// It is an error to reentrantly initialize the cell from `f`. Doing

>     /// so results in a panic or a deadlock.

Reviewer 3: It may be obvious, but not to me: it is impossible to detect reentrant initialization *always* and guarantee a panic.

Detecting reentrancy requires a way to know the difference between another thread that wants to initialize concurrently, and a reentrant initialization function.

Now it is not all that hard to detect if the current thread is trying to initialize the `OnceCell` recursively. Just compare the thread id (or something else unique, like a the address of thread local static) with the id stored when initialization begun.

But if the initialization function spawns other threads, I see no good way to differentiate between concurrent and reentrant initialization.

Still, it seems nice to be able to give the guarantee that reentrant initialization will result in a panic as long as the initialization function doesn't involve other threads.

    pub const fn new(init: F) -> Lazy<T, F>;
}

impl<T, F: FnOnce() -> T> Lazy<T, F> {
    /// Forces the evaluation of this lazy value and returns a reference to
    /// the result.
    ///
    /// This is equivalent to the `Deref` impl, but is explicit.
    pub fn force(this: &Lazy<T, F>) -> &T;
}

impl<T, F: FnOnce() -> T> Deref for Lazy<T, F> {
    type Target = T;

    fn deref(&self) -> &T;
}
```

`Lazy` directly replaces `lazy_static!`:

```rust
use std::{sync::{Mutex, Lazy}, collections::HashMap};

static GLOBAL_DATA: Lazy<Mutex<HashMap<i32, String>>> = Lazy::new(|| {
    let mut m = HashMap::new();
    m.insert(13, "Spica".to_string());
    m.insert(74, "Hoyten".to_string());
    Mutex::new(m)
});
```

Moreover, once `#[thread_local]` attribute is stable, `Lazy` might supplant `std::thread_local!` as well:

```rust
use std::cell::{RefCell, Lazy};

#[thread_local]
pub static FOO: Lazy<RefCell<u32>> = Lazy::new(|| RefCell::new(1));
```

However, `#[thread_local]` attribute is pretty far from stabilization at the moment, and due to the required special handling of destructors, it's unclear if just using `cell::Lazy` will work out.

> Unlike `lazy_static!`, `Lazy` can be used used for locals:

Reviewer 10: `used used` - is it ok?

use std::cell::Lazy;

fn main() {
    let ctx = vec![1, 2, 3];
    let thunk = Lazy::new(|| {
        ctx.iter().sum::<i32>()
    });
    assert_eq!(*thunk, 6);
}
```

However, `#[thread_local]` attribute is pretty far from stabilization at the moment, and due to the required special handling of destructors, it's unclear if just using `cell::Lazy` will work out.

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

The proposed API is directly copied from [`once_cell`] crate.

Altogether, this RFC proposes to add four types:

* `std::cell::OnceCell`, `std::cell::Lazy`

> * `std::sync::OnceCell`, `std::sync::Lazy`

Reviewer 11: I see that we have [`sync::Once`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/sync/struct.Once.html) and [`cell::Cell`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/cell/struct.Cell.html), but this may be confusing. Just a thought.

Reviewer 6: This is kinda like the combination of both, so the naming may be good (modulo `Send`/`Sync` concerns). But it would be better if the `!Sync` version had a different name from the `Sync` version.

Reviewer 12: Perhaps acknowledging `OnceCell` as a WORM (write once, read many) might make `WormCell` be a better name? <del>Assuming that the implementation isn't too sluggish.</del>

Reviewer 12: I also would really like to see there be a different name for these, rather than relying on the fact that they lie in two separate modules. Maybe just prefixing the sync implementations with `Sync` is enough, i.e. `SyncLazy` and `Lazy`.

Author: I would be against WORM terminology, as it seems rather obscure: I don't think I see it often enough to not consult wikipedia. A more appropriate term would probably be `SingleAssignmentCell`, but that's a mouthful.

Ultimately, I doubt that there's a perfect solution for cell/sync naming, so the libs team would have to just decide on some particular naming scheme. I am personally ok with `Sync` prefix. The disadvantage of `SyncX` scheme is that it makes more common case longer to spell, and is a tautology (`sync::SyncOnceCell`).

I personally like the proposed `cell::OnceCell / sync::OnceCell` variant the most:

* if you want extra, you can qualify the type with `cell::` or `sync::` on the call site, instead of importing it
* due to how awesome Rust is, it's impossible to use `cell::OnceCell` instead of `sync::OnceCell`, and the mistake in other direction is not really a mistake: just a very slight perf loss
* in practice, I think it would be rare for a module to use `cell` and `sync` versions simultaneously.

Reviewer 11: I think I like the way it's organized in the `once_cell` crate with explicit `sync::*` and `unsync::*` modules.

The part that feels the most strange to me about this currently proposal is that a `OnceCell` lives in both `cell` (makes sense, since it's a type of cell), and `sync` (makes sense, given that `Once` is also defined here). Something's conflated here, though this could well be outside the scope of this RFC.

Author: Yeah, another possibility is to introduce something like lazy and lazy::sync modules. As it stands, std::sync today feels a bit like, well, kitchen sync, it has a bit of everything.

I can imagine an alternative world, where std::sync is only for synchronization primitives, atomic and mpsc are top-level modules and Arc lives in rc. In this world, having an std::lazy module would definitely be better.

With current stdlib structure, std::sync::OnceCell blends better with the background.

Reviewer 7: Also, everything in `std::cell` is `!Sync` so it sort of maps to crates.io’s `once_cell::unsync`.

Reviewer 13: The libs team has discussed moving stuff out of std::sync into more appropriate modules (e.g. std::mutex::Mutex). I think ideally we wouldn't throw more stuff in there.

                ???
            })
        }
    }
}
```

Or for singletons, initialized with parameters:

```rust
use std::{env, io, sync::OnceCell};

#[derive(Debug)]
pub struct Logger { ... }

static INSTANCE: OnceCell<Logger> = OnceCell::new();
impl Logger {
    pub fn global() -> &'static Logger {
        INSTANCE.get().expect("logger is not initialized")
    }
    fn from_cli(args: env::Args) -> Result<Logger, std::io::Error> { ... }
}

fn main() {
    let logger = Logger::from_cli(env::args()).unwrap();

    // Note how we use locally-created value for initialization.
    INSTANCE.set(logger).unwrap();

    // use `Logger::global()` from now on
}
```

## Why `OnceCell` as a primitive?

It is possible to imagine a type, slightly more general than `OnceCell`:

```rust
struct OnceFlipCell<U, V> { ... }

impl<U, V> OnceFlipCell<U, V> {
    const fn new(initial_value: U) -> OnceFlipCell<U, V>;

    fn get_or_init<F: FnOnce(U) -> V>(&self, f: F) -> &V;
}

type OnceCell<T> = OnceFlipCell<(), T>;
```

That is, we can store some initial state in the cell and consume it during initialization.
In practice, such flexibility seems to be rarely required.

> Even if we add a type, similar to `OnceFlipCell`, having a dedicated `OnceCell` (which *could* be implemented on top of `OnceFlipCell`) type simplifies a common use-case.

Reviewer 3: To be honest this alternative feels like a useless snowflake, maybe nice for a specialized crate. I think it is better to concentrate on the main insight: `OnceCell` is safe because it gets only written once.

This alternative `OnceFlipCell` that combines a `OnceCell` with an enum distracts from that, and imho the RFC is better off without it.

Reviewer 3: Hmm, relevant discussion: https://old.reddit.com/r/rust/comments/bx75zh/once_cell_021_100_macrofree_lazystatic/eq5qev0/

## Variations of `set`

The RFC proposes "obvious" signature for the `set` method:

```rust
fn set(&self, value: T) -> Result<(), T>;
```

Note, however, that `set` establishes an invariant that the cell is initialized, so a more precise signature would be

```rust
fn set(&self, value: T) -> (&T, Option<T>);

> ```

Reviewer 3: Wouldn't returning either a reference or the original value in the `Result` make more sense?
```rust
fn set(&self, value: T) -> Result<&T, T>;
```

I like this signature more, because it states the guarantee, and can allow users to avoid a `get` right after `set`.

It does not really cost us anything either. `set` already has to check an atomic to see if the cell is initialized, and creating the reference can be optimized away if it is not used.

Author: If the `set` fails, you still can get a reference back. That is, getting back back (old) &T and (new) T is a possible valid outcome of a blocking set operation

Reviewer 3: O of course.
Some example code if you want to `set`, and then `get` a value.

The variant in the main text of the RFC:
```rust
pub fn set(&self, value: T) -> Result<(), T>;

let _unused = my_cell.set(42);
let val = my_cell.get();
```

Alternative variant in the RFC:
```rust
fn set(&self, value: T) -> (&T, Option<T>);

let (val, _unused) = my_cell.set(42);
```

My alternative:
```rust
fn set(&self, value: T) -> Result<&T, T>;

let val = match my_cell.set(42) {
    Ok(val) => val,
    Err(_unused) => my_cell.get(),
}
```

Okay, I prefer the basic variant in the RFC :+1:

To be able to return a reference, `set` might need to block a thread.
For example, if two threads call `set` concurrently, one of them needs to block while the other moves the value into the cell.
It is possible to provide a non-blocking alternative to `set`:

```rust

> fn try_set(&self, value: T) -> Result<&T, (Option<&T>, T)>

Reviewer 3: (about the optional extension `try_set`)
Wow, this is an ugly signature! As it does not establish the invariant that the cell is initialized, it seems better to not return a reference at all.
```rust
fn try_set(&self, value: T) -> Result<(), T>
```

```

That is, if value is set successfully, a reference is returned.
Otherwise, ther the cell is either fully initialized, and a reference is returned as well, or the cell is being initialized, and no valid reference exist yet.

## Support for `no_std`

The RFC proposes to add `cell::OnceCell` and `cell::Lazy` to `core`, while keeping `sync::OnceCell` and `sync::Lazy` `std`-only.
However, there's a subset of `sync::OnceCell` that can be provided in `core`:

```rust
impl<T> OnceCell<T> {
    const fn new() -> OnceCell<T>;
    fn get(&self) -> Option<&T>;
    fn try_set(&self, value: T) -> Result<&T, (Option<&T>, T)>
}
```

It is possible because, while `OnceCell` needs block for full API, its internal state can be implemented as a single `AtomicUsize`, so the `core` part does not need to know about blocking.
It is unclear if this API would be significantly useful.

> In particular, the guarantees of non-blocking `set` are pretty weak, and are not enough to implement the `Lazy` wrapper.

Reviewer 3: First this [post on reddit](https://old.reddit.com/r/rust/comments/cy910u/announcing_once_cell_100_single_assignment_cells/eyrfmna/) seems relevant:

> I am not an expert in the things that people use `#[no_std]` for, but my hypothesis is that, to make a robust `#[no_std]` library, one needs some more invasive changes than just swapping all mutexes for spin locks. I think that it is totally possible that a no_std target has some support for real blocking or preemption, and using spinning in this case seems wrong.
>
> A potential disaster movie scenario is this: there's no_std-only crate A which uses once_cell with default_features = false. An application B, which uses std and runs on linux, uses A. No other crate depends on once_cell, so its `std` feature is not activated, and it uses spinlock. A thread of B gets preempted while in `get_or_init` called from A. Another thread of B calls into A again, and is stuck busy-waiting. Granted, a lot of stars need to align to make this really bad, but the possibility still exists.
>
> On the other hand, if you are writing a no_std library, there's a high chance that you actually don't need blocking at all: in no_std your opportunities are limited, and whatever you do probably fits into lock free initialization. [rand/#50](https://github.com/rust-random/getrandom/issues/50) is a good example of this.
>
> If you are writing a no_std crate, and you are absolutely sure that you need blocking, I think it's best to parametrize your library by the `Mutex` trait, so that the users of your crate might plug it into whichever blocking facilities the host environment provides.

I wonder if spinning is always such a bad idea. `OnceCell::get_or_init` takes a closure that may take arbitrary long to execute, with the guarantee that is not running concurrently on another thread. But what if the initialization function is cheap and running it more than once doesn't matter? Then a thread could just start to run the closure first, and only spin for a few moments while the value is `memcpy`'d into place.

This would be pretty much the same as how a library would have to use `try_set` if it wants to support `no_std`, but knows as little about the target as `OnceCell`:
```rust
let cell = OnceCell::new();
let my_cheap_initialization = 21 + 21;
cell.try_set(my_cheap_initialization);
while cell.get().in_none() {}
```

This wouldn't combine well with `OnceCell`, because one thread could use our hypothetical initialization function, while another thread could do something else. But it is an option for `Lazy`, were the method of initialization is fixed at creation time:
```rust
impl<T, F> Lazy<T, F> {
    /// Creates a new lazy value with the given initializing function.
    pub const fn new(init: F) -> Lazy<T, F>;

    /// Creates a new lazy value with the given initializing function.
    /// The function may be executed by more than one thread at once, only the
    /// result of the first one to finish will be used.
    /// can be used in no_std.
    pub const fn new_concurrent(init: F) -> Lazy<T, F>;
}
```

This is just an idea, and a compromise. But as some `no_std` solution seems highly desired (see `lazy_static`), maybe something to consider.

Author: >But what if the initialization function is cheap and running it more than once doesn't matter? 

Yeah, this is an alternative design. If you are potentially ready to run initialization function several times and through away the result, you can even make this lock free, by boxing a value and atomically swapping the pointer. 

This is a valuable, but different, primitive. For std, I think it makes sense to lean towards more simple semantics, and guarantee that, while one thread runs initialization, all other block.

Reviewer 14: > > But what if the initialization function is cheap and running it more than once doesn't matter?

> Yeah, this is an alternative design. If you are potentially ready to run initialization function several times and through away the result, you can even make this lock free, by boxing a value and atomically swapping the pointer.

> This is a valuable, but different, primitive. For std, I think it makes sense to lean towards more simple semantics, and guarantee that, while one thread runs initialization, all other block.

FWIW, this "valuable, but different" primitive would be ideal for *ring*'s needs for `Once`.

## Poisoning

As a cell can be empty or fully initialized, the proposed API does not use poisoning.
If an initialization function panics, the cell remains uninitialized.

> An alternative would be to add poisoning, which will make all subsequent `get` calls to panic.

Reviewer 3: I would like to compare the reason `Mutex` and `Once` use poisoning with `OnceCell`.

- `Mutex` is often used when multiple operations need to be done on some data to keep it in a consistent state. In that case it makes sense to poison the Mutex on panic, so other threads can know the data may now be inconsistent. It is not necessary for memory safety, but an extra safeguard.
- `std::sync::Once` can also poison itself on panic. As it guarantees to run only once, it makes sense to 'report' it when that one execution failed.

So in both cases there is a good reason to report something went wrong. Is there such a reason for `OnceCell`?
- We don't have to warn about possibly leaving things in an inconsistent state, as the `OnceCell` will simply remain empty on panic.
- The basic guarantee that makes `OnceCell` safe is that there will only ever be one write to the wrapped value. That is not necessary a guarantee that some closure will only be executed once: if it panics in one thread, another may give it another try.

So I think the question of whether poisoning on `OnceCell` and `Lazy` is desirable is tied to the question: **do we want to warn if the initialization closure is run more than once?** And how much may that warning cost?

As a guess I would say users of `OnceCell` mostly care about whether the value is initialized, and not if the initialization function is run exactly once.

So I wouldn't want to see a warning on overy use, unless you do some 'soothening'. Be it having `OnceCell.get()` returning `None`, or `Lazy` panicking on deref. That seems much to invasive.

But we could add the 'warning' with limited overhead to the `OnceCell.get_or_init()`, `OnceCell.try_get_or_init()`, and `Lazy::new()`. Just provide the closure that they take with a `bool` that indicates whether a previous attempt to initialize failed.

Example:
```rust
impl OnceCell {
    /* ... */

    pub fn get_or_init<F>(&self, f: F) -> &T
    where
        F: FnOnce(bool) -> T;
}
```
```rust
let cell = OnceCell::new();
// When you don't care about panicing, notice the extra `_`:
cell.get_or_init(|_| 21 + 21);
// If you want to handle it:
cell.get_or_init(|panicked| { if panicked { panic!(); 21 + 21 }});
```

This would be a breaking change for the current API of `once_cell`. But it seems like a nice and easy way for users to opt into stronger guarantees.

I think it would be good if the simple `OnceCell.set()` would just override a previous panic and initialize 'no matter what'.

B.t.w. the current behaviour os `lazy_static` if different from `once_cell`. `lazy_static` will poison itself on panic, and has no way to recover.

Author: I feel pretty strongly that, by default, we shouldn't expose tweaks for panicking behavior. Users of the API should not think about panics at all, unless they are in very specific circumstances. 

So, I think should either poison, or not poison, without any changes to the API (well, if we implement poisoning we might add some future-extension like `force_init` a-la `Once`, but that's definitely out of scope for the initial version).

I ... don't really know what would be the difference between poisoned and non-poisoned versions in practical usage. Abstract argument about the lack of invariants which could be broken favors non-poisoning. Consistency with all other std synchronization primitives favors poisoning.

Reviewer 3: Ik think there are two more things to consider around poisoning.

#### Is it possible to build poisoning on top of `OnceCell`?

Suppose someone wants poisoning, is it possible to make a wrapper type to add it to `OnceCell`? Something like `OnceCell<Poisoner<T>>`?

- If you store the knowlegde that a previous initialization panicked inside the `OnceCell`, that would count as an initialization. There would be no way to recover / retry.
- If you store the knowlegde outside the `OnceCell`, you run into the question of [synchronization guarantees](https://github.com/matklad/rfcs/blob/std-lazy/text/0000-standard-lazy-types.md#synchronization-guarantees).

Both would add some space overhead.

#### Do we expect `lazy_static` to migrate to the implementation in the standard library?

`lazy_static` currently poisones on a panic during initialization, it would be a change in behavoir to change that. That seems like an argument to add some form of poisoning support to the standard library implementation.

@matklad I agree with you that the choice of poisoning doesn't seem the be that interesting in practice. 

How about keeping track of a 'poisoned' state in `OnceCell`, and expose a method to check it for the rare case where you want to know the initialization closure is run more than once? It can be used like:
```rust
let x: OnceCell<i32> = OnceCell::new();
x.get_or_init(|_| {
    if x.prev_init_panicked() { panic!() };
    1
});
```

This addition can also be done later as it is backwards-compatible.

* `get_or_init` and `get_or_try_init` methods can be used to conveniently initialize a cell.
* `get_` family of methods return `&T`.

Similarly to other interior mutability primitives, `OnceCell` comes in two flavors:

* Non thread-safe `std::cell::OnceCell`.
* Thread-safe `std::sync::OnceCell`.

Here's how `OnceCell` can be used to implement lazy-initialized global data:

```rust
use std::{sync::{Mutex, OnceCell}, collections::HashMap};

fn global_data() -> &'static Mutex<HashMap<i32, String>> {
    static INSTANCE: OnceCell<Mutex<HashMap<i32, String>>> = OnceCell::new();
    INSTANCE.get_or_init(|| {
        let mut m = HashMap::new();
        m.insert(13, "Spica".to_string());
        m.insert(74, "Hoyten".to_string());
        Mutex::new(m)
    })
}
```

Here's how `OnceCell` can be used to implement a lazy field:

```rust
use std::{fs, io, path::PathBuf, cell::OnceCell};

struct Ctx {
    config_path: PathBuf,
    config: OnceCell<String>,
}

impl Ctx {
    pub fn get_config(&self) -> Result<&str, io::Error> {
        let cfg = self.config.get_or_try_init(|| {
            fs::read_to_string(&self.config_path)
        })?;
        Ok(cfg.as_str())
    }
}
```

> We also provide a more convenient but less powerful `Lazy<T, F>` wrapper around `OnceCell<T>`, which allows to specify the initializing closure at creation time:

Reviewer 15: ```suggestion
We also provide the more convenient but less powerful `Lazy<T, F>` and `LazyLock<T, F>` wrappers around `OnceCell<T>` and `OnceLock<T>`, which allows specifying the initializing closure at creation time:
```

```rust

> pub struct Lazy<T, F = fn() -> T> { ... }
> 
> impl<T, F> Lazy<T, F> {
>     /// Creates a new lazy value with the given initializing function.
>     pub const fn new(init: F) -> Lazy<T, F>;
> }
> 
> impl<T, F: FnOnce() -> T> Lazy<T, F> {
>     /// Forces the evaluation of this lazy value and returns a reference to
>     /// the result.
>     ///
>     /// This is equivalent to the `Deref` impl, but is explicit.
>     pub fn force(this: &Lazy<T, F>) -> &T;
> }
> 
> impl<T, F: FnOnce() -> T> Deref for Lazy<T, F> {

Reviewer 15: ```suggestion
pub struct LazyCell<T, F = fn() -> T> { ... }

impl<T, F: FnOnce() -> T> LazyCell<T, F> {
    /// Creates a new lazy value with the given initializing function.
    pub const fn new(init: F) -> LazyCell<T, F>;
    
    /// Forces the evaluation of this lazy value and returns a reference to
    /// the result.
    ///
    /// This is equivalent to the `Deref` impl, but is explicit.
    pub fn force(this: &LazyCell<T, F>) -> &T;
}

impl<T, F: FnOnce() -> T> Deref for LazyCell<T, F> {
```

    type Target = T;

    fn deref(&self) -> &T;
}
```

> `Lazy` directly replaces `lazy_static!`:
> 
> ```rust
> use std::{sync::{Mutex, Lazy}, collections::HashMap};
> 
> static GLOBAL_DATA: Lazy<Mutex<HashMap<i32, String>>> = Lazy::new(|| {

Reviewer 15: ```suggestion
`LazyLock` directly replaces `lazy_static!`:

```rust
use std::{sync::{Mutex, LazyLock}, collections::HashMap};

static GLOBAL_DATA: LazyLock<Mutex<HashMap<i32, String>>> = LazyLock::new(|| {
```

    let mut m = HashMap::new();
    m.insert(13, "Spica".to_string());
    m.insert(74, "Hoyten".to_string());
    Mutex::new(m)
});
```

Moreover, once `#[thread_local]` attribute is stable, `Lazy` might supplant `std::thread_local!` as well:

```rust
use std::cell::{RefCell, Lazy};

#[thread_local]
pub static FOO: Lazy<RefCell<u32>> = Lazy::new(|| RefCell::new(1));
```

> However, `#[thread_local]` attribute is pretty far from stabilization at the moment, and due to the required special handling of destructors, it's unclear if just using `cell::Lazy` will work out.

Reviewer 15: ```suggestion
```

imho this doesn't add much to the guide explanation

Unlike `lazy_static!`, `Lazy` can be used for locals:

```rust

> use std::cell::Lazy;
> 
> fn main() {
>     let ctx = vec![1, 2, 3];
>     let thunk = Lazy::new(|| {

Reviewer 15: ```suggestion
use std::cell::LazyCell;

fn main() {
    let ctx = vec![1, 2, 3];
    let thunk = LazyCell::new(|| {
```

`Lazy` can be stabilized separately from `OnceCell`, or it can be omitted from the standard library altogether.
However, it provides significantly nicer ergonomics for the common use-case of static lazy values.

Non thread-safe flavor is implemented by storing an `UnsafeCell<Option<T>>`:

```rust
pub struct OnceCell<T> {
    // Invariant: written to at most once.
    inner: UnsafeCell<Option<T>>,
}
```

The implementation is mostly straightforward.
The only tricky bit is that reentrant initialization should be explicitly forbidden.
That is, the following program panics:

```rust
let x: OnceCell<Box<i32>> = OnceCell::new();
let dangling_ref: Cell<Option<&i32>> = Cell::new(None);
x.get_or_init(|| {
    let r = x.get_or_init(|| Box::new(92));
    dangling_ref.set(Some(r));
    Box::new(62)
});
println!("would be use after free: {:?}", dangling_ref.get().unwrap());
```

Non thread-safe flavor can be added to `core` as well.

The thread-safe variant is implemented similarly to `std::sync::Once`.
Crucially, it has support for blocking: if many threads call `get_or_init` concurrently, only one will be able to execute the closure, while all other threads will block.

> For this reason, most of `std::sync::OnceCell` API can not be provided in `core`.

Reviewer 15: ```suggestion
For this reason, most of `std::sync::OnceLock` API can not be provided in `core`.
```

Was the sync version intended here, or `core::cell::OnceCell` instead?

In the `sync` case, reliably panicking on re-entrant initialization is not trivial.
For this reason, the implementation would simply deadlock, with a note that a deadlock might be elevated to a panic in the future.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

* This is a moderately large addition to stdlib, there's a chance we do something wrong.

>   This can be mitigated by piece-wise stabilization (in particular, `Lazy` convenience types are optional) and the fact that API is tested in the crates.io ecosystem via `once_cell` crate.
> 
> * The design of `Lazy` type uses default type-parameter as a work-around for the absence of type-inference of statics.

Reviewer 15: ```suggestion
  This can be mitigated by piece-wise stabilization (in particular, `LazyCell` convenience types are optional) and the fact that API is tested in the crates.io ecosystem via `once_cell` crate.

* The design of `LazyCell` type uses default type-parameter as a workaround for the absence of type inference of statics.
```

* We use the same name for unsync and sync types, which might be confusing.

# Rationale and alternatives
[rationale-and-alternatives]: #rationale-and-alternatives

> ## Why not `Lazy` as a primitive?
> 
> On the first look, it may seem like we don't need `OnceCell`, and should only provide `Lazy`.
> The critical drawback of `Lazy` is that it's not always possible to provide the closure at creation time.

Reviewer 15: ```suggestion
## Why not `LazyCell` as a primitive?

On the first look, it may seem like we don't need `OnceCell`, and should only provide `LazyCell`.
The critical drawback of `LazyCell` is that it's not always possible to provide the closure at creation time.
```

    const fn new(initial_value: U) -> OnceFlipCell<U, V>;

    fn get_or_init<F: FnOnce(U) -> V>(&self, f: F) -> &V;
}

type OnceCell<T> = OnceFlipCell<(), T>;
```

That is, we can store some initial state in the cell and consume it during initialization.
In practice, such flexibility seems to be rarely required.
Even if we add a type, similar to `OnceFlipCell`, having a dedicated `OnceCell` (which *could* be implemented on top of `OnceFlipCell`) type simplifies a common use-case.

## Variations of `set`

The RFC proposes "obvious" signature for the `set` method:

```rust
fn set(&self, value: T) -> Result<(), T>;
```

Note, however, that `set` establishes an invariant that the cell is initialized, so a more precise signature would be

```rust
fn set(&self, value: T) -> (&T, Option<T>);
```

To be able to return a reference, `set` might need to block a thread.
For example, if two threads call `set` concurrently, one of them needs to block while the other moves the value into the cell.
It is possible to provide a non-blocking alternative to `set`:

```rust
fn try_set(&self, value: T) -> Result<&T, (Option<&T>, T)>
```

That is, if value is set successfully, a reference is returned.

> Otherwise, ther the cell is either fully initialized, and a reference is returned as well, or the cell is being initialized, and no valid reference exist yet.

Reviewer 16: ```suggestion
Otherwise, the cell is either fully initialized, and a reference is returned as well, or the cell is being initialized, and no valid reference exist yet.
```

## Support for `no_std`

> The RFC proposes to add `cell::OnceCell` and `cell::Lazy` to `core`, while keeping `sync::OnceCell` and `sync::Lazy` `std`-only.
> However, there's a subset of `sync::OnceCell` that can be provided in `core`:

Reviewer 15: ```suggestion
The RFC proposes to add `cell::OnceCell` and `cell::LazyCell` to `core`, while keeping `sync::OnceLock` and `sync::LazyLock` `std`-only.
However, there's a subset of `OnceLock` that can be provided in `core`:
```

* Specifying type for local lazy value might be tricky: `let x: Lazy<i32> = Lazy::new(|| closed_over_var)` fails with type error, the correct syntax is `let x: Lazy<i32, _> = Lazy::new(|| closed_over_var)`.

## Only thread-safe flavor

It is possible to add only `sync` version of the types, as they are the most useful.
However, this would be against zero cost abstractions spirit.
Additionally, non thread-safe version is required to replace `thread_local!` macro without imposing synchronization.

## Synchronization Guarantees

In theory, it is possible to specify two different synchronization guarantees for `get` operation, release/acquire or release/consume.
They differ in how they treat side effects.
If thread **A** executes `get_or_init(f)`, and thread **B** executes `get` and observes the value, release/acquire guarantees that **B** also observes side-effects of `f`.

Here's a program which allows to observe the difference:

```rust
static FLAG: AtomicBool = AtomicBool::new(false);
static CELL: OnceCell<()> = OnceCell::new();

// thread1
CELL.get_or_init(|| FLAG.store(true, Relaxed));

// thread2
if CELL.get().is_some() {
  assert!(FLAG.load(Relaxed))
}

> ```

Reviewer 17: The use of consume memory order exposes the most subtle and non-intuitive properties of the memory model to the user code: happens before relationship is not transitive.

Using consume memory order in a language that doesn't support it, without explicit opt-int, in place where it will inevitably introduce subtle bugs into user code, code that would be otherwise correct, doesn't seem like a good trade-off to make for claimed performance benefits.

Under release/acquire, the assert never fires.
Under release/consume, it might fire.

Release/consume can potentially be implemented more efficiently on weak memory model architectures.
However, the situation with `consume` ordering is cloudy right now:

* [nobody knows what it actually means](http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2016/p0371r0.html),
* [but people rely on it in practice for performance](https://docs.rs/crossbeam-utils/0.7.0/crossbeam_utils/atomic/trait.AtomicConsume.html#tymethod.load_consume).

We can do one of the following:

1. Specify and implement `acquire` ordering,
2. Specify `consume` but implement `acquire` (or hack `consume` in an implementation-defined manner) with the hope to make implementation more efficient later.

> 3. Specify and implement `acquire`, but provide additional API which can take `Ordering` as an argument.

Reviewer 18: > The exact definition of "depend on" is a bit vague, but it works as you would expect in practice since a lot of software, especially the Linux kernel, rely on this behavior.

- crossbeam_utils::AtomicConsume::load_consume

> It is widely accepted that the current definition of memory_order_consume in the standard is not useful. All current compilers essentially map it to memory_order_acquire. 
...
>  Currently there is no way to express this code in a way that is both performant and standard-conforming.
...
> It is likely that any such revision will not be fully backwards-compatible with the old one, but will better support common use cases. 

- the deprecation proposal for memory_order_consume

The links are helpful, but examining them raises more confusion. And some architectures Rust supports default to acquire-based semantics, so someone compiling on them would not expect the bugs that arise in another architecture because they always acquire. Others default to consume-like semantics, and run slower if forced to acquire. However, because of the former, it seems like embedding an implicit consume contract is an invitation for Heisenbugs because a user cannot actually know and try to test for if the access is consume-ordered or not, no?

Author: > However, because of the former, it seems like embedding an implicit consume contract is an invitation for Heisenbugs because a user cannot actually know and try to test for if the access is consume-ordered or not, no?

This is true more or less about all atomics in Rust: most people test only on x86 (I certainly do), and it implements a relatively strong memory model.

Reviewer 18: That's true, but a lot of the `atomic` APIs accept `atomic::Ordering`, and Rust doesn't expose a variant of `atomic::Ordering::Consume`, so it seems premature to specify it as a default.

And if someone writes code that works on one architecture but is different on another, well, arguably that's the breaks. It's rust-lang not miracle-lang.  But specifying Consume, implementing Acquire, and then on _one_ architecture **relaxing** to Consume when `atomic::Ordering::Consume` becomes available seems like deliberately breaking the API for one architecture in a way that may not be easily understandable, and testing is hard even if you have such a machine. So I suppose I will narrow it down further: specifying Consume as a default **could** be OK, but should that method remain unstable until an Ordering::Consume is also stabilized? I am not as sure about 2b, since it seems like a very different case in actuality.

I'm in favor of standard lazy types, it just seemed like something to think about.

Reviewer 18: On the upside, since I made this comment, a bunch of aarch64 targets arrived in tier 1 and tier 2 with host tools, and at least one is even a popular developer platform, so debugging this admittedly seems more plausible.

Option two seems the most promising:

* it is forward compatible with specifying `acquire` later,
* for typical `OnceCell` use-cases, `consume` should be enough.

>   For guaranteeing side effects, `std::sync::Once` may be used instead.

Reviewer 15: ```suggestion
Given the cost of `consume` ordering for minimal benefit, this crate proposes to specify and implement `acquire/release` ordering. If at some point Rust adds a `consume/release` option to `std::sync::atomic::Ordering`, the option of adding API methods that accept an `Ordering` can be considered.

# Prior art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

The primary bit of prior art here is the [`once_cell`] library, which itself draws on multiple sources:

* [double-checked-cell](https://crates.io/crates/double-checked-cell)
* [lazy-init](https://crates.io/crates/lazy-init)
* [lazycell](https://crates.io/crates/lazycell)
* [mitochondria](https://crates.io/crates/mitochondria)
* [lazy_static](https://crates.io/crates/lazy_static)

Many languages provide library-defined lazy values, for example [Kotlin](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin/lazy.html#kotlin$lazy(kotlin.Function0((kotlin.lazy.T)))).
Typically, a lazy value is just a wrapper around closure.
This design doesn't always work in Rust, as closing over `self` runs afoul of the borrow checker, we need a more primitive `OnceCell` type.

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

- What is the best naming/place for these types?

> - What is the best naming scheme for methods? Is it `get_or_try_init` or `try_inert_with`?

Reviewer 15: ```suggestion
- What is the best naming scheme for methods? Is it `get_or_try_init` or `try_insert_with`?
```
